---
layout: post
title: Tor Torture
date: 2021-09-08
lastEdited: 2022-04-08 15:00
---

Recently blessed with a bit of time at the end of the academic year I found
myself with a strong itch to get outdoors and go camping. Three days and two
rough nights in Dartmoor later and I found that itch had in fact intensified!
That might have been the ticks, though.

## Preparation

The last camping trip I had been on was probably a good seven years ago, and
even then the whole thing was organised by my school's cadet force meaning I
only really had to do the easiest part, so to say I was out of practice would
be an understatement. Spent a few days shopping for all the essentials like a
medical kit, cooking equipment, and a map, but somehow left buying boots until
the day before. Even then it was Amazon Prime next-day delivery which came to
the rescue, so breaking them in was out of the question. I was able to borrow a
few bits of kit from my flatmate, too, so my savings didn't take quite as
sizeable a hit as they could have. My total kit list was as follows:
- bergen (capacity barely sufficient but unknown)
- two person tent and the appropriate pegs
- sleeping bag, bivvy bag
- roll mat
- 1L bottle, 1.5L bottle
- waterproof jacket
- clothes
- stiff new leather walking boots
- food and 1L methylated spirits
- compass, whistle, big ol' trusty knife
- first aid kit

I also picked up an ordnance survey map from Waterstones and plotted a route
through the various tors the National Park had to offer, full of off-piste
diversions onto military firing ranges and grand overestimations of my ability
to traverse the undulating geography of the region.

In all I planned about 60km of walking over two days which started in an
eastern corner of the park and ended at a nature reserve on its west side. The
final day was to be dedicated to the grueling task of walking from the nature
reserve all the way to Liskeard to meet my friend.

## Getting There

The journey from London to Dartmoor is a whole adventure in itself. I got a
train from Paddington to Exeter St. David's which took about two hours,
followed by an hour and a half bus journey from Exeter to Lustleigh, a town
east of the national park where my walking route started. The train cost about
£50 and the bus just a few pounds. Getting back was slightly more convenient
since I was getting the train back from Liskeard, not quite a small village in
the middle of nowhere. The journey to Paddington took about three and a half
hours and cost about a tenner more.

## The Journey

My starting point -- Lustleigh -- was in fact so remote that I had to team up
with the bus driver to make sure I didn't miss the stop. Thankfully I was
allowing myself to use Google right up until I started walking my plotted route
officially and we spotted the right bus stop nestled behind a bush a short walk
out from the village. I made a quick stop at the post office to get some water
and snacks, and ate my nectarine in the sun outside while I cut some paracord
for the necklace on which I would hang my compass. That done, the time was
about two o'clock and I was ready to begin.

Immediately I went wrong. I had been meaning to walk southwest towards
Pethybridge, and even asked a local to point me in the right direction, but
somehow missed a turning and found myself near Waye Farm to the north. I
managed to reorient myself after some effort and only a bit of lost time, but
this was the first indication that navigating would require constant attention
both towards my location on the map and of my surroundings, to look out for
various signs and landmarks that would help me on my way.

I managed to get myself back on track in Hisley Wood so I continued downhill
towards Old Clam Bridge and more importantly the stream, where I filled up my
water bottles for the first time. The sun was shining and even through the
trees I was feeling the heat, so I threw a water purification tablets in my
replenished bottles and took a few sweaty swigs.

{% 
	include image.html
	url="/assets/dartmoor-2021/penny-tree.jpg"
	width="400"
	description="The penny tree near the town of Water. Try and spot my coin."
%}

[Kirchhoff's Second
Law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kirchhoff's_circuit_laws#Kirchhoff's_voltage_law)
interpreted geographically, says that what goes downhill must break its back
getting uphill again, and the journey back out of the small valley of Lustleigh
Cleave was a taxing one. Once I was out I continued west towards Hayne Down, at
the top of which I made my first food stop. There was some shelter from the
wind sitting amongst a clearing in the ferns next to a wall of rocks, but it
was certainly an unforgiving environment from the perspective of my little
meths burner. The plan had been to cook a packet of ready-made rice and wash it
down with a cup of tea but the wind was proving too fearsome an adversary, so I
said sod it and made do with somewhat warm rice and some water. The time was
about half five so I treated myself with some dried apricots, cleaned up my
mess, and resumed my walking.

The walk down the west side of the hill was pleasant and was followed by a
gentle incline up Cripdon Down, where I came across a cow doing its best
impression of the Atom Heart Mother album art. Golden hour was peaking in the
stretch from Jay's Grave up to Natsworthy Manor, but continuing onto Hamel Down
I noticed the golden light was quickly fading with the sky becoming blocked by
a layer of cloud the colour of steel wool. I quickly backtracked on a decision
to push through the coming storm so I made my way back down past a memorial to
a World War Two bomber crew that went down on the Tor and into the woods to set
up camp for the night.

{% 
	include image.html
	url="/assets/dartmoor-2021/cow.jpg"
	width="400"
	description="Atom Heart Child."
%}

I walked north past a small collection of homes calling themselves Heathercombe
and set up my tent on a small grassy patch under some trees by a brook a few
minutes' walk from the footpath. I had practiced setting up my tent in a park
near where I live shortly before journeying out so it didn't take too long to
be out of the open air, which by now was replete with midges, after which I
tucked into dinner then got ready for bed. The ground on which I had pitched
looked even enough, though by the time I was laying in my sleeping bag my roll
mat did little to cushion the harsh clump of earth digging into my lower back.
As a result the night's sleep was pretty rough -- constant interruptions from
the sheer discomfort of it all, and while I was sleeping with my knife by my
side the creaking and rustling nearby caused me to occupy my mind unwillingly
with contingency plans for potential hostile encounters during the night.

{% 
	include image.html
	url="/assets/dartmoor-2021/campsite-1.jpg"
	width="400"
	description="The first campsite. My tent was in the bright patch of grass
	on the right."
%}

I was awake fairly early and after another unsuccessful attempt to brew some
tea I ate some breakfast, packed up the tent, and continued on my way. After
refilling my water at a stream in the middle of Heathercombe I headed back up
Hameldown Tor, greeting once again the cows grazing by the stream at its foot,
until a brief rest and stop for food at the top of Hookney Tor overlooking a
circular structure of rocks called Grimspound. Now on Two Moors Way I walked
down the footpath towards Benett's Cross then across the B3212 onto Chagford
Common. I took the opportunity to take a seat in a gouged out clump of earth
near a bunch of horses, and slightly further on was an alleyway of stones
ending in a circle and a horse.

Although it was only a short distance to the entrance of Fernworthy Forest it
was perilous crossing. An oversight during preparation meant that I hadn't
noticed the marshland demarcations on the map, meaning I waded straight into
sucking bog and waist-high shrubs and an uncertain idea of when it would end.
Thankfully any crisis involving sinking or twisted ankles was avoided (though I
must have been trying to find one when jumping across a small stream blocking
the way) and I was now on my way along the southern edge of Fernworthy
Reservoir. Given that I was now sodden up to my shins in bogwater I went for a
dip in the water while I left my clothes to dry -- or as much as possible on
what was a cold and fairly overcast day. After a quick bite I made my way to
the opposite side of the reservoir to enter the forest by Fernworthy Circle.
The forest itself was a very calming but eerie place -- there was a great
stillness to everything as the rows of huge thin trees and thick layer of
bright green moss seemed to deaden all incoming sound.

It wasn't too long until I had reached the western edge of the forest, and the
five kilometre stretch from Long Ridge down to Postbridge which followed was some
of the nicest walking of my trip. I recall having some issue determining
whether I was on the correct (read: walkable) side of a valley near Sittaford
Tor, but after some backtracking it was a straight trip down into the town.
Some confidence features including beehive huts, walls of old settlements, and
the river helped to assure me I was sticking to the right path, and the long
walk down the valley was rewarded with a picturesque spot to sit down and
refill my water where the path met with the stream.

{% 
	include image.html
	url="/assets/dartmoor-2021/watering-hole.jpg"
	width="400"
	description="My reward for traversing the length of Long Ridge."
%}

I passed a group of people doing their Duke of Edinburgh award as I was coming
into Postbridge and they seemed surprised when I told them I was hiking for the
fun of it. At least, at that point I was still doing it for fun. I headed south
down the main road out of Postbridge until the entrance to Bellever Wood and
proceeded to make my way through another forest. This one was more
straightforward with fewer possibilities of taking the wrong path. I noticed
someone was hot on my heels behind me and it wasn't long until they had caught
up to me. He appeared to be a seasoned hiker evinced by his shorts, ultra
lightweight backpack, and walking sticks, and talking to him confirmed this
fact. He told me about his walking experiences along the South West Coast Path
and heartily recommended a pub down that way -- I want to say it was Leemy. I
made it to the top of Bellever Tor and with the light beginning to go it was
time to find a spot to spend the night.

This time I did indeed get lost in the woods thanks to several paths appearing
to be the public footpath on my map, but not being so, leading me astray. After
considering a spot in the forest on a slope I searched little longer and
settled on a narrow flat area on the side of a gravel path. I put up the tent
and jumped inside to tuck into a nice tin of cold baked beans. What followed
was amongst the worst nights of sleep that I have had. Every force has an equal
and opposite reaction and while I got to sleep early, around ten o'clock, I was
woken up as early by the thunderous din of rain hitting the outside of the tent
at around four o'clock. I also realised two small puddles had formed inside the
tent as a result of the undulations in the ground on which I had pitched. In a
panic I packed up all my loose kit so that I was ready to go if the situation
got worse, and although I drifted off to sleep again briefly I was just as
quickly woken by the rain again.  Eventually giving up any hope of rest I was
up, out, and raring to go just slightly after seven o'clock. 

{% 
	include image.html
	url="/assets/dartmoor-2021/campsite-2.jpg"
	width="400"
	description="The second campsite. Might look dry but it wasn't."
%}

I made my way into the small village of Bellever (where I passed a youth hostel
whose existence I am glad I was unaware of the previous night, when my
willpower to continue wild camping might have failed me) and then onto the
footpath north back towards Postbridge. Breakfast that morning was a
particularly memorable one -- since I had finished the three ready-made rice
packets as well as my beans it was time to crack out the tinned sardines and
tin of garden peas. It was certainly a slog forcing myself to eat the bland
soggy dregs of the peas so as not to waste any calories. However, the end was
almost literally in sight and it wasn't too much later until I had made it back
to the small town of Postbridge. After resting a while by the stone bridge, I
popped into the post office for a much needed cream tea -- made from all local
ingredients! At this point according to my route there was still the Postbridge
to Burrator Reservoir to Liskeard legs of the journey. Thoroughly behind the
pace and with two days of hiking beginning to wear on me, I decided I would
simply get the train to my friend in Liskeard as opposed to walking there. It
was a few hours until the next bus to the station and unfortunately the pub
didn't open until midday -- what a perfect bookend that would have been! I
hopped on the bus when it arrived and it was weird, even if completely
expected, to get a few miles down the road and see the section of Bush Down I
had been trudging across only the day before. Finally allowing myself to listen
to some music I stuck on some Frank Zappa as my home for the past two days
receded behind me.

{% 
	include image.html
	url="/assets/dartmoor-2021/cream-tea.jpg"
	width="400"
	description="Tea, scone, jam, clotted cream, all sourced locally."
%}

## The End

All in all it had been a very successful and enjoyable trip, not least because
I had managed to not kill myself or get killed in the short 48 hour window that
I had been away from most civilisation. I spent most of that time in clothes
heavy and cold with sweat, all the while breaking in my new boots as they broke
me. I got to see some of the lovely sights that the National Park has to offer
and appreciate the grandness of it, as well as finally getting some clean air
circulating through my lungs. I also realised that I would be completely okay
with eating cold baked beans for several days in a row, which will greatly
simplify the grocery shop for my next trip, while I can probably leave tinned
garden peas off the list. Never has tea and scones been so rewarding as it was
that final morning. There are a few things I'd like to improve for the next
time I go, such as better and more considered route planning and wiser
clothing, but I am pleased with how my first solo camp turned out. There is a
lot to be said for just getting outside and away from everything and being
immersed in nature, and I was surprised how I was quite happy to simply walk
for eight hours a day with no need for any diversions like music or podcasts.

And while I only discovered two ticks after getting home, the itch to get out
and go camping again has not gone. I'm currently eyeing the [Mach
Loop](https://machloop.co.uk/) in Wales so I can gawp at the fast jets flying
low-level over (or rather, under) head.

{% 
	include image.html
	url="/assets/dartmoor-2021/teignmouth.jpg"
	width="400"
	description="A fine view coming into Teignmouth."
%}
