---
layout: post
title: Tor Torture
date: 2021-09-08
---

Recently blessed with a bit of time at the end of the academic year I found
myself with a strong itch to get outdoors and go camping. Three days and two
rough nights in Dartmoor later and I found that itch had not only remained, but
intensified! Might have been the ticks, though.

## Preparation

The last camping trip I had gone on had probably been a good seven or so years
ago, so the first hurdle to overcome was getting buying all the gear.  Somehow
I found a way to shop for walking boots, one of the most important bits of kit
for walking holiday, the day before setting off and even then it was by the
grace of Amazon Prime next day delivery. My flatmate is pretty keen on the
outdoors, so luckily I got a few bits from him like the tent, compass, stove,
and a length of paracord. The savings took a fair hit and in all I took with
me:
- bergen (capacity barely sufficient but unknown)
- two person tent and the appropriate pegs
- sleeping bag, bivvy bag
- roll mat
- 1L bottle, 1.5L bottle
- waterproof jacket
- plenty of cotton-rich, moisture-holding clothes
- stiff new leather walking boots
- food and 1L methylated spirits
- compass, whistle, big ol' trusty knife
- first aid kit

I also picked up an ordnance survey map from Waterstones and plotted a route
through the various tors the National Park had to offer, full of off-piste
diversions and grand overestimations of my abilities to traverse various
geographical features. I had 

In all I planned about 60km of walking over two days
which started in an eastern corner of the park and ended at a nature reserve on
its west side. The final day was to be dedicated to the grueling task of
walking from the nature reserve all the way to Liskeard to meet my friend.

## Getting there

Before all the fun walking activities could begin I had to get there, and the
journey from London to Dartmoor is a bit of an adventure in and of itself. I
got a train from Paddington to Exeter St. David's which took about two hours,
followed by an hour and a half bus journey from Exeter to Lustleigh, a town 


getting to Dartmoor from London is a whole adventure in and of itself. I got a
train from Paddington to Exeter St. Davids which took about two hours, followed
by an hour and a half bus journey from the station to Lustleigh, a town even
smaller than its results on Google Images suggest. As far as I could tell
direct buses from the train station to Lustleigh only run twice a day, with the
last one departing from Exeter St. Davids around one o'clock, a far cry from
the maximum eight minute wait I am used to here in the capital.

## Day One

I picked up the last vital supplies from Lustleigh's main attraction, its post
office, made some final preparations and got oriented with the map, then set
off. Despite getting lost at almost the first possible point, the first day
went well. I learned that cooking food was probably going to be more trouble
than it was worth, came across a memorial for a World War II bomber crew, and
found a cow attempting to recreate the Atom Heart Mother album cover. After
spotting some ominous looking clouds while exposed at the top of Hameldown Tor
as the light was beginning to fail I decided to duck back into the wood nearby
to set up camp for the night. 

The location of the first campsite was a 

## Eating

## Shitting

## Camping

## Pictures
