---
layout: post
title: SAGT 2021
date: 2021-09-26
---

{% include mathjax.html %}

## Tuesday

The opening day of SAGT 2021 was dedicated to two tutorial sessions. The first
talk, given by Martin Hoefer, was entitled "Algorithmic Challenges in
Information Design" and was concerned with the setting in which there is
asymmetric information and an expert -- the sender -- is trying to convince
someone who cannot observe the state of the world -- the receiver -- to take
some action that will benefit the sender. The main focus was on how to compute
the optimal signal to send for the sender that would net her the highest
expected utility, while also keeping the outcome desirable for the receiver
(the outcome had expected utility at least the average expected utility among
all states of the world). In general this could be considered as a set of
prize-box pairs $$(s_{ij},r_{ij})$$, which denotes the payoff for the sender
$$s$$ and receiver $$r$$ when $$r$$ takes action $$i \in [n]$$ in state $$j \in
[m]$$ of the world. I particularly liked the geometric interpretation, in which
prize-box pairs $$(s_{ij},r_{ij})$$ for a certain state $$j$$ form a set
$$C_j$$ in the plane, and then there is simple algorithm that computes the
optimal signal by starting at a point in the convex hull of $$C_j$$ and
changing the signal such that the receiver's utility does not fall below the
expected average utility line $$\mathbb{E}_r$$ and ... something to do with the
tangents of the convex hull. I have realised I need to review it, but it was
definitely very interesting.

The second tutorial was given by Vasilis Gkatzelis and was entitled
"Understanding the Power and Limitations of Clock Auctions". This started off
well and he managed to hype us up for clock auctions (suck it, sealed-bid
auctions), but in the end I think it got slightly too technical and I found
myself not paying as close attention. Still some nice-seeming results, and both
talks were keen to stress how many open problems there are in the respective
areas.

Had chicken and onions, rice and broccoli, and chickpeas for lunch and some tea
and a brownie in the breaks. Finished the day with some free bottles of Tuborg
and getting to know various attendees at the welcome reception at the end of
the day. Overall a good first day. Looking forward to the main conference
kicking off tomorrow.

## Wednesday

The first day of the conference saw three sessions of talks, the first
concerned with voting, the second on auctions, and the third on matching and
cooperative games. The most interesting among these was a presentation from
Michael McKay joint work with David Manlove on three-dimensional stable
matchings. It included some nice algorithms and analysis as well as a nice
reduction whose details I have completely forgotten. Earlier there was also a
talk on the "coalitional exchange-stable matching" from Jiehua Chen which also
had a nice NP-hardness reduction. I was most excited about the invited talk
given by Elias Koutsoupias on his paper with George Christodoulou and Annamaria
Kovacs, "On the Nisan-Ronen Conjecture for Graphs", since I had read it and it
tackles the mechanism design aspect from a more theoretical/abstract
perspective. Two best talks to listen to were those given by Georgios
Papasotiropoulos and Adrian Vetta -- the former for his seamless integration of
the Simpsons into his presentation, and the latter for his palpable passion for
piracy.

## Thursday

## Friday

## Saturday

## Sunday
