---
layout: post
title: What's in a Norm?
date: 2022-07-27
lastEdited: 2022-07-27 21:00
---

{% include mathjax.html %}

For a vector $$x \in \mathbb{R}^n$$ the $$\ell_p$$ norm of $$x$$, denoted
$$\| x \|_p$$, is defined for $$p \ge 1$$ as follows:

$$ \| x \|_p \triangleq \left( \sum_i |x_i|^p \right)^{1/p} $$

Setting $$p$$ to different values will give you a different notion of the
"size" of the vector $$x$$. Probably the most well-known example is with
$$p=2$$, in which case we recover the _Euclidean norm_ which can be used to
measure the "straight line" distance between two vectors.[^1] For $$p=1$$ we
can get the _Manhattan norm_ between two vectors, where we can imagine the
distance between two points as the number of streets a taxi must traverse in
order to get from one point to the other.

## The $$\ell_\infty$$ norm

The reason for writing this note was to have a proof of the value of the
$$\ell_\infty$$ norm written. That is, what is the resulting norm $$\| x \|_p$$
as we let $$p$$ go to infinity? I had been told that this $$\ell_\infty$$ norm
was equal to the maximum element in the vector $$x$$ but had never seen it
proved, so here is one such way of doing so.

**Claim:**

$$ \lim_{p \to \infty} \| x \|_p = \max_i |x_i| $$

**Proof:** Let $$m = \max_i |x_i|$$ be the maximum absolute value of an element
in $$x$$, and let $$q = | \{ x_i : |x_i| = m \} |$$ be the number of entries
equal to this value. The $$\ell_\infty$$ norm of $$x$$ is therefore

$$
\begin{align*}
\lim_{p \to \infty} \| x \|_p
& = m \lim_{p \to \infty} \frac{\| x \|_p}{m} \\
& = m \lim_{p \to \infty} \frac{1}{m} \left( \sum_i |x_i|^p \right)^{1/p} \\
& = m \lim_{p \to \infty} \left[ \left( \frac{1}{m} \right)^p \left( \sum_i |x_i|^p \right) \right]^{1/p} \\
& = m \lim_{p \to \infty} \left( \sum_i \frac{|x_i|^p}{m^p} \right)^{1/p} \\
\end{align*}
$$

Now notice that whenever $$|x_i| < m$$ then $$(|x_i|/m)^p$$ will tend to zero
as $$p$$ goes to infinity, and otherwise it will tend to one. Hence the sum
$$\sum_i \frac{|x_i|^p}{m^p}$$ will tend to $$q$$ as $$p$$ goes to infinity,
while $$q^{1/p}$$ will tend to one, so we get

$$
\lim_{p \to \infty} \| x \|_p = m \lim_{p \to \infty} q^{1/p} = m
$$

## The $$\ell_0$$ norm

Technically taking $$0 \le p < 1$$ does not define a norm since it does not
preserve the triangle inequality.[^2] Nonetheless if we define the $$\ell_p$$
norm for such $$p$$ according to [this comment](https://www.quora.com/What-is-the-L0-norm-in-linear-algebra?share=1) by simply ignoring the $$p$$th root we have

$$ \| x \|_p = \sum_i |x_i|^p $$

for $$0 \le p < 1$$. I suppose that for this reason the $\ell_\infty$$ norm is often taken to denote the number of non-zero entries in a vector $$x$$, 

## The $$\ell_3$$ norm?

Another reason for wanting to write this note was to gain a geometrical
understanding of norms other than the standard Euclidean and Manhattan ones.

## Footnotes

[^1]: Roughly, a norm measures the "size" of a single thing while a metric measures the distance between pairs of things, so we can define the distance $$d$$ with respect to some norm $$\ell_p$$ between two vectors $$x$$ and $$y$$ as $$d_p(x,y) = \| x - y \|_p$$.

[^2]: $$\| x+y \| \le \| x \| + \| y \| $$.
