---
layout: post
title: wale-2022
date: 2022-06-13
---

Here is my writeup of [WALE 2022](https://wale.gr/).

# Day 1

Later start toady than will be th erest of the week -- spent the morning doing errands then had lunch with Stavros and Bart. Had beef in tomato sauce and a Mamos beer (undecided how it stacks up to yesterday's Nymphos so far).

We heard talks on the topic of Multi-Agent Optimization from Yang Cai, Costis Daskalalkis, and Manolis Vlatakis, followed by several quick "spotlight" talks from:
- ...

Liked Yang Cai's talk on accelerating (non-)convex (non-)concave min max optimization problems.

We had a nice coffee from a bar nearby.

From about six o'clock we were free -- we walked to the Temple of Apollo where we stayed until sunset, then we met some guys at __ for dinner, where we had nice bread and dips, committed a mass killing of calamari, and finished off with raki.

# Day 2

Today we started at 11:30am. I decided I'd go for a (very brief) run beforehand and then cool off in the sea for a bit, so I ran for five minutes towards the sea and then got in, good way to start the day. I was going to then meet Stavros, Carmine, and Bart at a cafe before the day's talks started but our place is too far away so I only had time to get back, wash, and go straight to the talks. 

The topic of today's talks was mechanism design: I particularly liked Clayton
Thomas' talk about (loosely) how the serial dictatorship and top-trading cycles
mechanisms have a simpler description of strategyproofness than the deferred
acceptance algorithm. Spoke to him later in the day, said there was no paper
out yet so I will keep an eye out. I also liked Vangelis Markakis' talk 

# Day 3


