---
layout: post
title: Trip Report -- The 15th International Symposium on Algorithmic Game Theory (SAGT 2022)
date: 2023-01-13
---

{% include mathjax.html %}

Back in September of 2022 I attended the [15th International Symposium on Algorithmic Game Theory](https://www.essex.ac.uk/events/2022/09/11/sagt-2022), otherwise known as SAGT 2022, hosted by the University of Essex.
Its aim is to bring together researchers from computer science and economics to present and discuss recent advances in the field of algorithmic game theory, where the two topics meet.
I am fond of this conference in particular since the year prior -- at [SAGT 2021](https://events.au.dk/sagt2021/) -- had been my first time attending a conference in person, having started my Ph.D. at King's while the COVID pandemic was in full swing.
Having now attended SAGT twice I also like its friendly atmosphere and the close-knit community of researchers that attends it.
Here I will give a brief rundown of my experience at SAGT 2022.
I was fortunate to receive funding from the King's [Student Opportunity Fund](https://www.kcl.ac.uk/students/apply-for-funding-through-the-student-opportunity-fund) for registration and travel costs, without which it is unlikely I would have been able to attend.

{%
	include image.html
	url="/assets/sagt-2022/everyone.jpg"
	width="400"
%}

The conference took place from 12-15 September 2022, with the first day dedicated to two tutorials and the rest to talks on the accepted papers.
I will give a brief overview of the topics discussed in the tutorials and then discuss some papers I found particularly interesting.

## Tutorial 1: _Total Search Problems in Game Theory and Economics_

There is an active area of research in algorithmic game theory that deals with the complexity of finding solutions to special types of computational problems.
Often in computer science we want to find the complexity of determining _whether_ some object exists.
For many topics of interest in algorithmic game theory there is some theorem that _guarantees_ the existence solutions, hence we focus on slightly different classes of problem.
This tutorial gave an overview of recent results in computational complexity for _total function problems_, complexity classes relevant to algorithmic game theory.

### Primer on computational complexity 

Computational complexity theory is concerned with quantifying the difficulty of solving certain computational problems.
For example, given some natural number $$n$$ we may wish to decide if $$n$$ is prime or composite, or in other words output 1 if the only divisors of $$n$$ are 1 and itself and otherwise output 0.
This is an example of a _decision problem_, which asks us to _decide_ whether some object (in this case, natural number $$n$$) has some property or not (in this case, whether $$n$$ is prime).
The name of this computational problem is $$\texttt{PRIMES}$$.
Another example of a decision problem is the $$\texttt{CLIQUE}$$ problem: given a graph $$G = (V,E)$$ and an integer $$k$$, does there exist a subset $$V' \subseteq V$$ such that $$\| V' \| \ge k$$ and every pair of vertices in $$V'$$ is connected by an edge?
If such a subset $$V'$$ exists then we output 1, otherwise we output 0.

Two popular complexity classes used to classify these types of problems are the classes $$\texttt{P}$$ and $$\texttt{NP}$$.
Informally $$\texttt{P}$$ contains all decision problems whose solutions we can find in polynomial time, while `NP` contains all decision problems whose solutions we can _verify_ in polynomial time.
Resolving whether these two complexity classes are equal is a somewhat important [open problem](https://www.claymath.org/millennium-problems).
Central to the field of complexity theory is the notion of a _reduction_, which allows us to transform one problem into another and prove things about how hard it is to solve.
One important reduction is the _Karp reduction_ which formalises one concept of using an oracle for one problem as a subroutine for solving another.
A problem $$A \subseteq \{ 0,1 \}^*$$ is polynomial-time Turing reducible to another problem $$B \in \{ 0,1 \}^*$$ if there exists a polynomial-time computable function $$f : \{ 0,1 \}^* \to \{ 0,1 \}^*$$ such that $$x \in A \iff f(x) \in B$$.
This is denoted $$A \le_p B$$.
A problem $$A$$ is $$\texttt{L}$$-hard if $$X \le_p A$$ for every problem $$X$$ in $$\texttt{L}$$.
We say that $$A$$ is $$\texttt{L}$$-complete if both $$A \in \texttt{L}$$ and $$A$$ is $$\texttt{L}$$-hard.

So far we have introduced decision problems.
It is well-known, for example, that $$\texttt{CLIQUE}$$ is $$\texttt{NP}$$-complete, meaning it represents all the hardest problems in $$\texttt{NP}$$.
In other words, if we can solve $$\texttt{CLIQUE}$$ efficiently then we would be able to solve _all_ problems in $$\texttt{NP}$$
Related to decision problems are *search problems* which ask us to both determine whether a solution exists and return a solution if it exists (and 0 otherwise).[^1]
Finally we arrive at the notion of interest for this first day's tutorial: total function problems and problems belonging to the complexity class $$\texttt{TFNP}$$.
A _functional problem_ is any problem with the following form: given input $$x$$ and polynomial-time predicate $$F(x,y)$$, if there exists a $$y^*$$ satisfying $$F(x,y)$$ then output any such $$y^*$$, otherwise output 0.
For example, if $$F$$ is the predicate "assignment $$y$$ is a satisfying assignment for Boolean formula $$x$$" then the function problem would be to output, whenever $$x$$ is satisfiable, a satisfying assignment $$y$$ of $$x$$.

It may be that there exist some instances $$x$$ for which there exist no $$y$$ such that $$F(x,y)$$ is satisfied -- it is easy, for example, to construct an unsatisfiable Boolean formula, e.g. $$\phi = x \land \neg x$$.
To simplify matters we may restrict our attention to function problems that are _guaranteed_ to have a solution.
When considering function problems whose decision variants are in $$\texttt{NP}$$, i.e. function problems whose certificates we may verify in polynomial time, this gives rise to the complexity class $$\texttt{FNP}$$.
When the corresponding function problem is guaranteed to have a solution (i.e., the function is total) then we have the class $$\texttt{TFNP}$$.

### The class $$\texttt{TFNP}$$

For each problem in $$\texttt{TFNP}$$ we are guaranteed to have a solution.
In other words given some predicate $$F$$ then for each $$x$$ there must exist at least one $$y$$ such that $$F(x,y)$$ is true.
We can further classify the problems in $$\texttt{TFNP}$$ depending on how such a guarantee is provided.
The following are a few subclasses of $$\texttt{TFNP}$$:
- $$\texttt{PPA}$$ (for **P**olynomial **P**arity **A**rgument): existence is guaranteed by the fact that any graph whose nodes have degree at most two must have an even number of leaves.
- $$\texttt{PPAD}$$ (for **PPA** on **D**irected graphs): existence is guaranteed by the fact that a directed graph with an unbalanced (in-degree unequal to out-degree) node must have another unbalanced node
- $$\texttt{PPP}$$ (for **P**olynomial **P**igeonhole **P**rinciple): existence is guaranteed by the Pigeonhole Principle which states that if $$n$$ items are to be put into $$m < n$$ containers then there must be at least one container with more than one item.
- $$\texttt{PLS}$$ (for **P**olynomial **L**ocal **S**earch): existence is guaranteed by the fact that any directed acyclic graph must have a sink.

A celebrated result in the algorithmic game theory literature is that $$\texttt{εNASH}$$, the problem of computing an approximate [Nash Equilibrium](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nash_equilibrium) of a finite game, is $$\texttt{PPAD}$$-complete.
Since then there has been much interest in the algorithmic game theory community in classifying a host of other total function problems.
The takeaway from this tutorial was that the theorem by which some mathematical object is guaranteed to exist can provide hints as to which subclass of $$\texttt{TFNP}$$ the associated computational problem belongs.

### $$\texttt{TFNP}$$ problems in algorithmic game theory

Here we will introduce some problems that might be of interest to us in algorithmic game theory, starting with the problem of computing an approximate Nash Equilbrium of a finite game.

**ε-Nash Equilbrium:**
Consider some finite $$n$$-person game given in normal form where each player $$i \in [n]$$ has a finite set $$S_i$$ of pure strategies.
By $$S = \times_{i \in [n]}$$ we denote the set of all strategy profiles.
A mixed strategy for player $$i$$ is a probability distribution $$\Delta(S_i)$$ over her pure strategies, and a mixed profile $$\sigma \in \Delta(S)$$ is a probability distribution over pure strategy profiles.
For each mixed profile $$\sigma \in \Delta(S)$$ player $$i$$ has an associated expected utility $$u_i(\sigma) \in \mathbb{R}$$.
A mixed strategy $$\sigma_i$$ is a best response to the partial mixed profile $$\sigma_{-i}$$ if $$u_i(\sigma_i,\sigma_{-i}) \ge u_i(\sigma_i',\sigma_{-i})$$ for every $$\sigma_i' \in \Delta(S_i)$$.
Finally a Nash Equilbrium is a mixed profile $$\sigma^\ast$$ such that each player $$i$$ is playing a best response $$\sigma_i^\ast$$ to $$\sigma_{-i}^\ast$$.
Our aim is to find a Nash Equilibrium of a given game.
Now a game for three or more people may admit only irrational solutions, so we instead look for ε Nash Equilibria, where in a given solution each player can only benefit by switching from mixed strategy $$\sigma_i$$ to $$\sigma_i'$$ by at most $$\varepsilon > 0$$.

**ε-Bayes-Nash Equilibrium of First-Price Auctions:**
In a first-price auction there are $$n$$ bidders and a single item for sale.
Each player has a private valuation $$v_i$$ and submits a bid $$b_i \in B \subseteq [0,1]$$.
The item is awarded to the highest bidder, who is made to pay their bid.
If there are ties then the winner is selected from the set of highest bidders uniformly at random.
The bidders also have beliefs of the true values of each of the other bidders: for each bidder $$i$$ her belief of the valuation of bidder $$j$$ is given by the continuous distribution $$F_{i,j}$$ over $$[0,1]$$.
In other words, bidder $$i$$ believes that the valuation $$v_j$$ of bidder $$j$$ is drawn from $$F_{i,j}$$.
In this context a strategy of bidder $$i$$ is a function $$\sigma_i : [0,1] \to B$$ mapping her own value to a bid (taking into account her subjective beliefs).
Again we are looking to compute an $$\varepsilon > 0$$ (Bayes) Nash Equilibrium of the induced game, or a mixed strategy profile $$\sigma$$ such that for each bidder $$i$$ we have $$u_i(\sigma_i(v_i),\sigma_{-i}) \ge u_i(b_i,\sigma_{-i}) - \varepsilon$$ for all $$b_i \in B$$.

**Necklace Splitting with Two Thieves:**
We have a necklace with two types of jewels and two thieves who want a cut of equal value of the necklace (i.e., the same number of each type of jewel).
We want to cut the necklace using $$n$$ cuts such that the thieves are satisfied.

**Consensus Halving:**

Here we will introduce some problems that belong to each of the subclasses of $$\texttt{TFNP}$$ listed above, beginning with $$\texttt{PPAD}$$.
The canonical problem in $$\texttt{PPAD}$$ is known as $$\texttt{EndOfALine}$$ which loosely asks to find either a sink or a source of a directed graph where each node has at most one incoming and one outgoing edge.
What's the problem?
Surely we can just run our favourite graph traversal algorithm until we find such a node?
The catch is that the graph can be exponential in size and so we are given it _implicitly_ in the form of two circuits, $$P$$ and $$S$$, which give the predecessor and successor nodes of some given node when queried.
It turns out this problem is $$\texttt{PPAD}$$-complete.
I mentioned that the problem of computing an approximate Nash Equilibrium is $$\texttt{PPAD}$$-complete, in a celebrated result due to Daskalakis, Goldberg, and Papadimitriou.[^2]


## Tutorial 2: _Fair Division of the Indivisibles_

TODO.

## Invited Talks and Paper Presentations

- Algorithmic Game Theory Meets Behavioural Economics
- New Fairness Concepts for Allocating Indivisible Items
- Financial Networks with Singleton Liability Priorities
- PPAD-Complete Pure Approximate Nash Equilibria in Lipschitz Games
- Automated Equilibrium Analysis of 2x2x2 Games

## Footnotes

[^1]: Many (though not all -- see [this stackexchange post](https://cs.stackexchange.com/questions/49771/what-np-decision-problems-are-not-self-reducible)) $$\texttt{NP}$$ problems, and all $$\texttt{NP}$$-complete problems, are self-reducible and therefore the search variant is no harder than the decision variant of the problem.
[^2]: [_The complexity of computing a Nash equilibrium_](https://dl.acm.org/doi/fullHtml/10.1145/1461928.1461951), Constantinos Daskalakis, Paul W. Goldberg, and Christos H. Papadimitriou.
